# Chapter 2: Query Language

Background: [JSON](bg.md#json), [Server](bg.md#server)

> Chapters 2–4 are a complete reference for the GraphQL specification. If you want to get straight to coding, feel free to skip ahead to [Chapter 5: Client Dev](5.md) or [Chapter 11: Server Dev](11.md) and refer back here when necessary 😊. Or if you have the time and want a thorough base of understanding, take it in order.

Chapter contents:

* [Operations](2.md#operations)
* [Document](2.md#document)
* [Selection sets](2.md#selection-sets)
* [Fields](2.md#fields)
* [Arguments](2.md#arguments)
* [Variables](2.md#variables)
* [Field aliases](2.md#field-aliases)
* [Fragments](2.md#fragments)
  * [Named fragments](2.md#named-fragments)
    * [Type conditions](2.md#type-conditions)
  * [Inline fragments](2.md#inline-fragments)
* [Directives](2.md#directives)
  * [@skip](2.md#@skip)
  * [@include](2.md#@include)
  * [@deprecated](2.md#@deprecated)
* [Mutations](2.md#mutations)
* [Subscriptions](2.md#subscriptions)

---

# Operations

GraphQL is a specification for communicating with the server. We communicate with it—asking for data and telling it to do things—by sending [*operations*](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language.Operations). There are three types of operations:

- `query` fetches data
- [`mutation`](#mutations) changes and fetches data
- [`subscription`](#subscriptions) tells the server send data whenever a certain event occurs

Operations can have names, like `AllTheStars` in this query operation:

```
query AllTheStars {
  githubStars
}
```

# Document

Similar to how we call a JSON file or string a JSON document, a GraphQL file or string is called a GraphQL [*document*](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Document). There are two types of GraphQL documents—*executable documents* and *schema documents*. In this chapter, we'll mainly be discussing executable documents, and we'll cover schema documents in [Chapter 3](3.md). An executable document is a list of one or more operations or [fragments](#fragments). Here's a document with a query operation:

```gql
query {
  githubStars
}
```

Our operation has a single root [field](#fields), `githubStars`. In this type of document—a single `query` operation without [variables](#variables) or [directives](#directives)—we can omit `query`, so the above document is equivalent to:

```gql
{
  githubStars
}
```

A more complex document could be:

```gql
query StarsAndChapter {
  githubStars
  chapter(id: 0) {
    title
  }
}

mutation ViewedSectionOne {
  viewedSection(id: "0-1") {
    ...sectionData
  }
}

mutation ViewedSectionTwo {
  viewedSection(id: "0-2") {
    ...sectionData
  }
}

fragment sectionData on Section {
  id
  title
}

subscription StarsSubscription {
  githubStars
}
```

It has all the operation types as well as a fragment. Note that when we have more than one operation, we need to give each a name—in this case, `StarsAndChapter`, `ViewedSection*`, and `StarsSubscription`. 

# Selection sets

The content between a pair of curly braces is called a [*selection set*](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Selection-Sets)—the list of data fields we're requesting. For instance, the `StarsAndChapter` selection set lists the `githubStars` and `chapter` fields:

```gql
{
  githubStars
  chapter(id: 0) {
    title
  }
}
```

And `chapter` has its own selection set: `{ title }`.

# Fields

A [*field*](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language.Fields) is a piece of information that can be requested in a selection set. In the above query, `githubStars`, `chapter`, and `title` are all fields. The first two are top-level fields (in the outer selection set, at the first level of indentation), and they're called *root query fields*. Similarly, `viewedSection` in the below is a *root mutation field*:

```gql
mutation ViewedSectionTwo {
  viewedSection(id: "0-2") {
    ...sectionData
  }
}
```

# Arguments

On the server, a field is like a function that returns a value. Fields can have [*arguments*](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language.Arguments): named values that are provided to the field function and change how it behaves. In this example, the `user` field has an `id` argument, and `profilePic` has `width` and `height` arguments:

```gql
{
  user(id: 1) {
    name
    profilePic(width: 100, height: 50)
  }
}
```

Arguments can appear in any order.

# Variables

We often don't know argument values until our code is being run—for instance, we won't always want to query for user #1. The user id we want will depend on which profile page we're displaying. While we could edit the document at runtime (like `{ user(id: ' + currentPageUserId + ') { name }}'`), we recommend instead using static strings and [*variables*](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language.Variables). Variables are declared in the document, and their values are provided separately, like this:

```gql
query UserName($id: Int!) { 
  user(id: $id) {
    name
  }
}
```

```json
{
  "id": 2
}
```

After the operation name we declare `($id: Int!)`: the name of the variable with a `$` and the type of the variable. `Int` is an integer and `!` means non-null (required). Then we use the variable name `$id` in an argument in place of the value: `user(id: 2) => user(id: $id)`. Finally, we send a JSON object with variable values along with the query document.

We can also give variables default values, for instance:

```gql
query UserName($id: Int = 1) { 
  user(id: $id) {
    name
  }
}
```

If `$id` isn't provided, `1` will be used.

# Field aliases

We can give a field an [*alias*](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Field-Alias) to change its name in the response object. In this query, we want to select `profilePic` twice, so we give the second instance an alias:

```gql
{
  user(id: 1) {
    id
    name
    profilePic(width: 400)
    thumbnail: profilePic(width: 50)
  }
}
```

The response object is:

```
{
  "user": {
    "id": 1,
    "name": "John Resig",
    "profilePic": "https://cdn.site.io/john-400.jpg",
    "thumbnail": "https://cdn.site.io/john-50.jpg"
  }
}
```

# Fragments

- [Named fragments](2.md#named-fragments)
  - [Type conditions](2.md#type-conditions)
- [Inline fragments](2.md#inline-fragments)

## Named fragments

[*Fragments*](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language.Fragments) group together fields for reuse. Instead of this:

```gql
{
  user(id: 1) {
    friends {
      id
      name
      profilePic
    }
    mutualFriends {
      id
      name
      profilePic
    }
  }
}
```

we can combine fields with a fragment that we name `userFields`:

```gql
query {
  user(id: 1) {
    friends {
      ...userFields
    }
    mutualFriends {
      ...userFields
    }
  }
}

fragment userFields on User {
  id
  name
  profilePic
}
```

### Type conditions

Fragments are defined on a type. The type can be an [object](3.md#objects), [interface](3.md#interfaces), or [union](3.md#unions). When we're selecting fields from an interface or union, we can conditionally select certain fields based on which object type the result winds up being. We do this with fragments. For instance, if the `user` field had type `User`, and `User` was an interface implemented by `ActiveUser` and `SuspendedUser`, then our query could be:

```gql
query {
  user(id: 1) {
    id
    name
    ...activeFields
    ...suspendedFields
  }
}

fragment activeFields on ActiveUser {
  profilePic
  isOnline
}

fragment suspendedFields on SuspendedUser {
  suspensionReason
  reactivateOn
}
```

Then the server will use the fragment that fits the type returned. If an `ActiveUser` object is returned for user 1, the client will receive the `profilePic` and `isOnline` fields. 

## Inline fragments

[Inline fragments](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Inline-Fragments) don't have a name and are defined *inline*—inside the selection set, like this:

```gql
query {
  user(id: 1) {
    id
    name
    ... on ActiveUser {
      profilePic
      isOnline
    }
    ... on SuspendedUser {
      suspensionReason
      reactivateOn
    }
  }
}
```


# Directives

[Directives](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Language.Directives) can be added after various parts of a document to change how that part is [validated or executed](4.md) by the server. They begin with an `@` symbol and can have arguments. There are three included directives, `@skip`, `@include`, and `@deprecated`, and servers can define custom directives (as we do in [Chapter 11: Custom schema directives](11.md#custom-schema-directives)).

* [@skip](2.md#@skip)
* [@include](2.md#@include)
* [@deprecated](2.md#@deprecated)

## @skip

[`@skip(if: Boolean!)`](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec--skip) is applied to a field or fragment spread. The server will omit the field/spread from the response when the `if` argument is true.

```gql
query UserDeets($id: Int!, $textOnly: Boolean!) {
  user(id: $id) {
    id
    name
    profilePic @skip(if: $textOnly)
  }
}
```

```json
{
  "id": 1,
  "textOnly": true
}
```

Sending the above document and variables would result in the below response:

```json
{
  "data":  {
    "user": {
      "id": 1,
      "name": "John Resig"
    }
  }
}
```

> While the spec doesn't dictate using JSON to format responses, it is the most common format.

## @include

[`@include(if: Boolean!)`](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec--include) is the opposite of `@skip`, only including the field/spread in the response when `if` argument is true.

```gql
query UserDeets($id: Int!, $adminMode: Boolean!) {
  user(id: $id) {
    id
    name
    email @include(if: $adminMode)
    groups @include(if: $adminMode)
  }
}
```

```json
{
  "id": 1,
  "adminMode": false
}
```

Sending the above document and variables would result in the below response:

```json
{
  "data":  {
    "user": {
      "id": 1,
      "name": "John Resig"
    }
  }
}
```

Sending the above document and variables would result in the below response:

```json
{
  "data":  {
    "user": {
      "id": 1,
      "name": "John Resig"
    }
  }
}
```

## @deprecated

Unlike `@skip` and `@include`, which are used in executable documents, [`@deprecated`](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec--deprecated) is used in schema documents. It is placed after a field definition or enum value to communicate that the field/value is deprecated and why—it has an optional `reason` String argument that defaults to "No longer supported." 

```gql
type User {
  id: Int!
  name: String
  fullName: String @deprecated("Use `name` instead")
}
```

# Mutations

[Mutations](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Mutation), unlike queries, have side effects—i.e., alter data. The REST equivalent of a query is a GET request, whereas the equivalent of a mutation is a POST, PUT, DELETE, or PATCH. Oftentimes, when the client sends a mutation, it selects the data that will be altered so that it can update client-side state.

```gql
mutation {
  upvotePost(id: 1) {
    id
    upvotes
  }
}
```

In this example, the `upvotes` field will change, so the client *selects* it (i.e., includes it in the selection set).

While not enforced by the specification, the intention and convention is for only root mutation fields to alter data. 

We can include multiple root fields in a mutation, but they are executed in series, not in parallel. (All fields in a mutation below the top level and all query fields are executed in parallel.) This way, assuming the code resolving the first root mutation field waits for all of the side effects to complete before returning, we can trust that the second root mutation field is operating on the altered data. If the client *wants* the root fields to be executed in parallel, they can be sent in separate operations.

While technically "mutation" is an operation type, the root mutation fields are often called "mutations."

# Subscriptions

[Subscriptions](http://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Subscription) are long-lived requests in which the server sends the client data from events as they happen. The manner in which the data is sent is not specified, but the most common implementation is WebSockets, and other implementations include HTTP long polling, server-sent events (supported by all browsers except for IE 11), and webhooks (when the client is another publicly-addressable server). 

The client initiates a subscription with:

```gql
subscription {
  reviewCreated {
    id
    text
    createdAt
    author {
      name
      photo
    }
  }
}
```

As with mutations, we call the subscription operation's root field the "subscription," and its selection set is the data that the server sends the client on each event. In this example, the event is the creation of a review. So whenever a new review is created, the server sends the client data like this:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "reviewCreated": {
      "id": 1,
      "text": "Now that's a downtown job!",
      "createdAt": 1548448555245,
      "author": {
        "name": "Loren",
        "photo": "https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/251288"
      }
    }
  }
}
```